four of my patients have a billion
followers Justin Bieber niley Cyrus
Bella Hadid and we looked at their
brains and what we found is thank you so
much Dr Ayman Dr Daniel Eamon he's a
clinical neuroscientist New York Times
best-selling author one of America's
leading psychiatrists and brain health
experts why do you do what you do I have
to do what I do someone I love tried to
kill herself and she
[Music]
would have died I think I would have
always been left with a hole in my soul
most psychiatric illnesses are not
mental illnesses they're brain health
issues when you re-imagine mental health
is brain health changes everything so
you want to damage your brain do not
engage in new learning don't ever eat
fish never floss play football marijuana
alcohol nicotine caffeine it's a drug
you want to keep your brain healthy
takes three seconds so
did you know about the ace quiz it's 10
of the most common childhood traumas if
you have four or more you have an
increased risk of seven of the top 10
leading causes of death if you have six
or more you die for 20 years earlier is
there something that can be done to
change it absolutely if you came to see
me I would have you
before this episode starts I have a
small favor to ask from you two months
ago 74 of people that watch this channel
didn't subscribe we're now down to 69 my
goal is 50 so if you've ever liked any
of the videos we've posted if you like
this channel can you do me a quick favor
and hit the Subscribe button it helps
this channel more than you know and the
bigger the channel gets as you've seen
the bigger the guests get thank you and
enjoy this episode
oh
[Music]
Dr Eamon
why do you do what you do
it's uh
part of my soul
I have to do what I do
um
the short story so I got to do what I do
is when I was 18
Vietnam was still going on and I had a
low draft number and I became an
infantry medic where my love of medicine
was born but about a year into it I
realized I didn't like being shot at it
was irritating it was horrifying and I
got myself retrained as an x-ray
technician
and just developed a passion for medical
imaging as our professors used to say
how do you know unless you look
and that became a theme for my life and
then I got out of the Army in 1975 and
finished college and when I was a second
year medical student someone I love
tried to kill herself
and I was horrified I had no idea what
to do and I took her to see the chief of
the Department of Psychiatry where I
went to medical school
and I realized if he helped her
it wouldn't just help her
that ultimately it would help her
children and even her grandchildren as
they would be shaped by someone who was
happier and more stable
I fell in love with Psychiatry 1979. so
44 years ago and I've loved it every day
since
but I fell in love with the only medical
specialty that never looks at the organ
it treats
and even back then I'm like why aren't
we looking at the brain I mean obviously
the brain is the organ of depression the
brain is the organ of bipolar disorder
the brain is the organ of anxiety why
aren't we looking at it and they said
that's the future we will but not yet
and growing up my dad thought I was sort
of a pain in the ass he called me a
Maverick because I didn't just accept
what he said and it turns out he's true
and I'm pushing we should be looking at
the brain
in 1991 so I've been a psychiatrist
almost a decade
I went to my first lecture on brain spec
Imaging spect is a nuclear medicine
study that looks at blood flow and
activity it looks at how your brain
works and basically
shows us three things
good activity too little or too much
and then
it rocked my world I mean explosion in
my world it's like I have to look
why no unless I look and the lessons
just kept coming
that
the first lesson most psychiatric
illnesses are not mental illnesses
their brain health issues if I get your
brain healthy well your mind tends to
follow because your brain the physical
Moment by moment functioning of your
brain creates your mind and if your
brain isn't healthy your mind isn't
healthy so that was the first lesson and
I'm like
these these are not mental illnesses and
when you re-imagine mental health is
brain health changes everything it
changed everything I do as a
psychiatrist most psychiatrists you come
you go to them and you go I'm depressed
and then they'll give you a diagnosis
with the same name of what you just told
them to go you're depressed and then put
you on an antidepressant which in
large-scale studies work no better than
placebo
and I'm like so next lesson depression
is like chest pain
it doesn't tell you what causes it and
it doesn't tell you what to do for it
but we have whole Industries built on
money for medicine for mental health
conditions and I think it's complete
crap because they're not looking at the
organ they don't know is it from head
trauma is it from an infection is it
from a lousy diet is it from being
sedentary is it
because you don't know how to manage
your mind and
I then learned that mild traumatic brain
injury is a major cause of psychiatric
problems and nobody knows about it
because they don't look
at the Brian
and it's just like a little kid so
excited I still am 32 years later we've
done 225
000 scans
and it's it's it's so fun to be in the
future
helping people get well so I have to do
it I know that's a long answer I like
long answers you'll come to learn that
um
you've written so many books and you
seem to have the same energy you've
always had about this subject matter
when you sort of if you were to
encapsulate or to summarize
the mission that you're on
which is the source of all that energy
what is that mission that you're on
the mission is to end the concept of
mental illness
by creating
a revolution in brain help
and that mission just evolved you know
my mission when I graduated from medical
school was to be a really good
psychiatrist because it's personal to me
and to be a writer I wrote my first book
the year I graduated from medical school
and I found I loved the process that
writing brings me joy
that when I can take complex Concepts
and make them really easy to understand
and that's helpful to someone
I love that that's joyful to me and that
skill
has served my career so well because my
books bring a lot of people to we have
11 clinics around the US
and they often come because they've read
one of my books so they serve the
purpose of educating and then allowing
us to do the work we love doing if
someone's listening to this and they've
never really taken the time to learn
about the brain before because they
don't necessarily think it's so
important they you know they understand
things about dieting or whatever else
but the brain they kind of just assume
it's there right like a lot of people do
what case would you make to them about
the importance of
positive
healthy cognitive functions and brain
health what is the case why does it
matter to the ordinary person say if
they don't have a psychiatric you know
predicament they don't have a mental
health disorder why does the brain
matter to them because your brain's
involved in everything you do how you
think how you feel how you act how you
get along with other people your brain
is the organ of intelligence character
and every single decision that you make
and when your brain works right you work
right
and when your brain is troubled for
whatever reason mold covid head trauma
um
not sleeping chronic stress when your
brain's not right you're sadder sicker
poorer
less successful
I got to scan Tony Robbins you know the
famous success Guru and I love him and I
love his work and I think he's so smart
and he said publicly had mercury
poisoning he decided he loved swordfish
but it didn't love him back because it's
loaded with Mercury
and when we did a Facebook live I'm like
you are the software of success
but if the hardware is not working it's
going to be really hard to implement the
wonderful strategies that you teach and
I always think of people in four big
circles uh first week of medical school
Sid Garrett our Dean he said never think
of patience as by their diagnosis always
think of them in these four big circles
he went to the board and he drew the
first Circle which was biology and for
me it's like the physical functioning of
your brain and body and that's why the
scans are so important but then the
second Circle he drew was psychology
how's their mind working how are their
thoughts are they loaded with a term I
later coin called ants automatic
negative thoughts the thoughts that come
into your mind automatically and ruin
you and also in this circle is
development it's really the quality of
your mind and then the third circle so
if you think of the brain as the
hardware of your soul
the mind is the software
that needs to be programmed so you got
to get your brain healthy program your
mind and then work on the Social Circle
which is so what's going on in your life
think pandemic that was a social
disrupter but also how are your
relationships how's your job how's your
money
and then the last Circle that most
psychiatrists would never touch
is the spiritual Circle it's like why
the heck do you care what is your
deepest sense
of meaning and purpose
and so I think assessing
those four circles and working always to
optimize them at the same time
is critical for you being a whole
healthy person
but if your brain's not healthy because
you played soccer and you had four
concussions
doing all the therapy
it's not nearly as effective
is getting your brain right and then
doing the therapy I mean because I'm
like a huge fan of therapy and I have my
therapy patients that I love
but it's Hardware software network
connections always understanding
someone's sense of purpose
let's go into those four areas then just
to pause on that though you mentioned
Tony Robbins there when I was reading
through your story it became apparent
that you're quite the celebrity
psychiatrist
because a lot of celebrities have come
out and said that they work with you
give me a give me a taste do some name
dropping give me a couple of examples
um
it's public knowledge Bella Hadid came
out and said she stopped drinking
because of me and then the newspaper
tried to take my head off for that
controversial psychiatrist gets Bella to
stop drinking
um dealing with haters is something I've
become quite skilled at uh public
knowledge my I've been to Miley Cyrus's
doctor for 11 years I'm really proud of
her she had the number one song in the
world right now flowers and it's about
self-love which makes me so happy I'm in
Justin Bieber's docu-series Seasons
because I've been his doctor
um
I love helping them you know I often say
four of my patients have a billion
followers
so
it's about influence because if the
mission is to end mental illness by
creating a revolution in brain health
well you gotta have an army and so you
might as well have an army with a lot of
soldiers and so
um it's it's a very disruptive concept
because when you really understand it
you realize we're living in a war
and I'm serious about this everywhere
you go someone's trying to give you bad
food that will kill you early
everywhere you go you hear negative news
that's driving depression it's not the
news it scares you so they can sell you
stuff
um everywhere you go someone's trying to
put a gadget in your hand or your pocket
that will steal your dopamine and give
them the Mind share you should have
and the incidence of
diabetes is 50 of the population is
diabetic or pre-diabetic obesity is 72
percent or overweight or obese I
published three studies it shows your
weight goes up the size and function of
your brain goes down and people go you
can't talk about that it's like no you
can't not talk about that
um
Alzheimer's is expected to triple and
depression has gone up 400 percent since
Prozac came on the market so obviously
that didn't fix it and so it's what my
wife and I often refer to is the brain
Warrior's Way
you want to be armed and prepared to win
the fight of your life
that's so true I'm currently doing this
glucose test as part of this company
called Zoe I had Tim Spectrum the
podcast he's one of the co-founders they
do personalized nutrition it's this
incredible company based out in the UK
and so because I can see my glucose
right now on my phone
when I went into a gas station the other
day or a petrol station as we say in the
UK I looked around at my options and
every single thing was bad for me every
single thing in that gas station was
sugar or processed carbohydrates the
only thing I could get in that gas
station was water and I said to my
partner at the time so if you're hungry
and it's also if you're stressed or
tired
you are going to eat
this this this junk but anyway I'm going
back to unless you plan
unless you put stuff
in your car
uh or in your computer bag
and when you really love yourself you
take time
and like you know for example the
plastic water bottles are toxic that you
just like turn them over and does it say
a 204 or 5 on the recycle and like those
are pretty good they don't Leach toxins
narrowly as bad is one three six and
seven and just knowing that I always say
God gave us a big brain for a reason
it's like when you get motivated this
isn't hard brain health isn't hard being
sick is hard brain health is not
expensive being sick is expensive
um you just plan a little bit better in
terms of the hardware then which was the
first circle of your four circles what
can I do to make sure the hardware of my
brain what are the most important things
to be cognizant of to make sure my
Hardware is in good shape so that I have
a chance of my psychology and my my
connections my spiritual Circle being
I'm successful also
so I I like looking
um it's like
the brain is one of the only organs that
doctors virtually never screen you've
looked at a lot of brains right almost
looked at 230 000 Brands and
I mean I'm obsessed with if you came to
see me and you go you know I'm pretty
good
but I want to be great how's my brain
and we would look at it
and is it younger than you are because
you have good habits is it older than
you are because your habits aren't so
good or or let's just say it has nothing
to do with you your mom smoked when she
was pregnant with you or she smoked when
you were a baby and you're inhaling this
secondhand smoke which is stealing a
concept I call Brain Reserve so your
brain health may have something to do
with your habits or may have to do with
habits of other people so I think the
first thing it's a concept called brain
Envy I often say Freud was wrong penis
envy is not the cause of anybody's
problem I've actually not seen it once
in 40 years he was focused on the wrong
organ it's the brain and Freud actually
in 1895 said the brain science of my
time is not up to the task of explaining
patient symptoms
which was true in 1895 so he went off
and developed psychoanalysis and had a
lot of really nutty ideas but some
really great ideas
brain Science Now can explain a lot of
your symptoms so the first thing is to
assess it and
it's 1991 I ordered my first scan I
started scanning everybody I know I scan
my aunt who had a panic disorder I
scanned my mother had gorgeous brain
which fit her life and then I scanned
myself and it wasn't awesome and because
I played football in high school
had meningitis when I was a young
Soldier I had bad habits I wasn't
sleeping I ate a lot of bad food and I
was the top Neuroscience student in
medical school
but I didn't care about my own brain and
when I saw it that's when I fell in love
with it wanted my mother's brain the
idea of brain envy and I've been in love
with it ever since and one of my
patients said when he saw his scan for
the first time
was like seeing one of his children and
he knew he'd never heard it again and so
that's step number one you want a
healthy brain you got to care about it
step two is you have to avoid things
that hurt it and you just have to sort
of know the less and step three is
engage in regular brain healthy habits
again you just have to know the list
and the the simplest way and I love this
and I I noticed throughout my books
throughout the Arc of the evolution of
my books the prescriptions get easier
and easier because I'm always thinking
how do I plant it so it takes root and
grow and I work with BJ fog I don't know
if you know Dr Fogg from Stanford he's
in charge of the persuasive Tech Lab
because basically how do people change
and he said either they have an epiphany
so when I saw my first scan it was an
epiphany I didn't want an unhealthy
brain because I I understand what that
means for my life
um but he said most people it's not the
Epiphany it's the tiny habits it's like
what's the smallest thing you can do
today that will make the biggest
difference and it comes down to the
mother tiny habit so whenever you come
to a decision point in your day like
you're at the gas station
is this you ask yourself this question
takes three seconds is this good for my
brain
or bad for it and if you can answer that
with information
and love and this is very important love
of yourself love of your mission love of
your work you just start making better
decisions
and it whenever I say well you shouldn't
do this and you shouldn't do that it
just never works
you gotta tie into
I want something special for my life and
this is going to get it for me and so if
I'm at the gas station I'm looking at
the waters and I'm like okay what's got
a non-toxic bottle attached to it and
I'm going for the nuts because you know
people who have a fat based diet nuts
and seeds green leafy vegetables
healthy fish healthy oils
have 42 percent less risk of getting
Alzheimer's disease
people have a simple
carbohydrate-based diet so most of the
stuff in the gas station
bread pasta potatoes rice fruit juice
and sugar
the standard American diet have a 400
percent
increased risk of getting Alzheimer's
disease a study from the Mayo Clinic and
I love that you're monitoring your blood
sugar I just love that so much because
Alzheimer's disease people refer to it
often as type 3 diabetes and one of the
best things you can do for your health
is make sure your fasting blood sugars
under 90. and if it tends to run high
you can go I take metformin for that
or you can get rid of this simple
carbohydrates in your diet
so there's two things I was really
compelled by as you were speaking in two
directions I wanted to go in the first
is I want to know the list when we talk
about the things that are good and bad
for the brain but just before we get on
to that you said about how
you have to pause during your day when
you're making decisions and ask yourself
is this good for my brain now I I often
wonder why people know information but
don't change you talked about the
persuasive Tech Lab um I've always
wondered what the connection between
someone's self-worth and their ability
to do the right thing when they're in
that moment of making a decision for or
against them because it's been my
observation which has completely
unproven that people who have and I
wondered if you've seen this in your
practice but people that have a
maybe a more stressed life a lower sort
of self-worth a lower sort of self-image
of themselves tend to make short-term
decisions that are less
um constructive or Pro um positive for
the brain but just generally in life
anyway and I wondered if there's a link
there I often I'm asking this question
because I often wonder with some people
that are close to me with some of my
friends why they continue to make
decisions that they objectively know
aren't healthy
they're not good for their you know
their life their long-term prospects of
relationships their health whatever it
might be and I just it's a bit of a
left-field question but is there a
correlation in your view between one
self-esteem their self-worth their
self-image and their ability to sort of
delay gratification and make the right
Health decisions so it's actually
connected the do you know about the
marshmallow test I do yes I read about
it so
uh Walter Mitchell from Stanford would
give children small children three
four-year-old children
an opportunity to either have a
marshmallow now
or two
a bit later
and the children who delayed
gratification their self-esteem was
better their success virtually in every
area of their life was better now he
later discovered you can actually train
the ability to delay gratification
there's another study at Stanford I love
this study so much
um
they looked at
1541 10 year old children in 1921. it's
the longest longevity study ever done
and Lewis Turman psychologist at
Stanford
evaluated them and then he and others
followed them for 90 years looking at
what goes with health
success and longevity
and what he found was a bit shocking
that the don't worry be happy people
died the earliest from accidents and
preventable illnesses and I always
wanted to be that because I've never
been that don't worry be a happy person
I like show up on time I'm driven I'm
motivated of all my books they all they
get turned in a week or two early I'm
like no conscientious
and what they found was people who were
conscientious lived the longest I said
don't worry be happy person
how do you define well it's my brother
and I love my brother but he's 150
pounds overweight and he leaves work at
three o'clock plays golf he just like
doesn't care and for years I tried to
help him get healthy and I even set him
up with the cutest
nutritionist who I trusted and he didn't
show up and then I realized I was cared
more about this than he was and it sort
of broke my heart but it's that
nonchalant attitude
that's not taking things seriously and
it'll kill him early and that breaks my
heart
can you tell me about the Journey of
trying to help your brother because I
think a lot of people listening to this
have their own experience with trying to
help someone that they love and it's a
often resentful bitter failing battle
I've been there myself so let me switch
it to my dad okay because that has a
better ending at least now
um I did not have a good relationship
with my father
when I told my dad I wanted to be a
psychiatrist
he asked me why I didn't want to be a
real doctor why I wanted to be a nut
doctor and hang out with nuts all day
long and that's just hurtful
but I'd already not cared what he
thought
1972 I turned 18 I get to vote
George McGovern is who's very liberal is
running against Richard Nixon and I'm
like maybe I'll go for McGovern
my dad said if I did the country would
go to hell well I did and the country
went to help it had nothing to do with
the government had to do with Nixon and
Watergate and all that craziness so we
were like butting heads uh
when I started looking at the brain I'm
like come on dad I want let me scan your
brain
and he said no until years later
and I'm like Dad what I'm learning is
the brain is an organ like your heart is
an organ
we gotta get you healthy
and he's like oh great my nut doctor son
is now a health nut he's like what's
with you in the nuts
and so for 25 years
I nudged him
to get healthy and he belittled me he
made fun of me he would do it publicly
and it was
hurtful
but his opinion of me even though it
hurt it didn't matter I kept doing what
I do
and when he was 85
they had mold in their house and he
developed a chronic cough
and then a heart arrhythmia
and then heart failure
and I went over his house
and I saw he was depressed
and my dad didn't get depressed my dad
gave depression but he didn't get
depression and he looked at me
and he said Danny
I'm sick of being sick
what do you want me to do
and he's so stubborn he did everything
I asked him to do
he texts me a picture of the food he's
like can I eat this
and I'm like send me the ingredient list
and then I would Circle it and I'm like
in what universe is this good for you
and I'm one of seven children
um now he starts talking about me
to all of them and they would text me
and like tell him to like not be so
enthusiastic and we started working out
together he's a beast he could do a six
minute plank because he's so stubborn
and over six months he lost 40 pounds
his energy came back his heart was
better he starts driving again
and live the next five years in love
with his brain and love with his body
and if he
would have died
before those five years I think I would
have always been left with a hole
in my soul
that helped
repair it
and the only reason he did it is because
I did it
the only reason he
got healthy is because I modeled
the message
and ultimately that's what I tell my
patients you never know when they're
going to turn like I still never know if
my brother will turn I love him I model
I'm always there with
a suggestion
right but I'm not caring more than he
cares
what would that whole have been
I think
it's one of the big gifts
that I was given
that he looked at me and said what do
you want me to do
is that
I'm assuming from hearing that it's
because that was the moment where he
kind of accepted you and you're worth in
your job and you're
yes
and he told everybody
besides me how proud he was of me
and the first time he told me he loved
me was when I was 50.
which is just nuts when you think about
it I mean he's from a different
generation and
um
but I just can't even imagine it
when we have someone in our lives that
um
maybe wasn't fair to us in some way
whether it's a parent or an ex-partner
or whatever
how do we how do we not let the
resentment or the negative emotions or
the negative experiences or that feeling
of Injustice that like we like this
situation wasn't fair
how do we get to a place of empathy with
those people so that we can live
you know without the burden of that like
resentment or you know regret or
whatever it might be
well I have a perfect example so I
started Imaging in 1991. I am
a distinguished fellow of the American
Psychiatric Association
I won a research award I am respected by
my colleagues but I start Imaging and
initially there was acceptance and then
because the Imaging doesn't really go
with the diagnostic Orthodoxy they're
like shouldn't do that
and now I'm caught in a bind I love
being connected to my colleagues
but there's no way I'm not looking at
your brain if I can and so there's this
tension and for three or four years I
feel challenged I feel belittled I feel
anxious and I'm starting to become
ostracized from my group
so I'm anxious and I'm furious
um
and then in 1995
my nine-year-old nephew Andrew attacks a
little girl on the baseball field for no
reason so my brother's youngest son
and my sister-in-law calls me up and
she's crying and she said she went into
his room that day and found two pictures
he'd drawn one of them is hanging from a
tree in a suicide attempt nine years old
the other one he's shooting other
children so he's like columbine or
Parkland Florida or Sandy Hook I mean
we're into that kind of Darkness
and
999 child psychiatrists out of a
thousand would have put him on medicine
and put him in therapy but because now
four years I've been looking at the
brain we'd already correlated violence
to the left temporal lobe left temporal
lobe dysfunction often went with
violence I'm like I want to see him and
so they drove eight hours and I'm
sitting with my nephew who I'm also his
Godfather and
like buddy what's going on he said Uncle
Danny I don't know I'm mad all the time
I said is anybody hurting you he said no
I said has anybody teasing you he said
no is anybody touching you and places
they shouldn't be touching you
no
and when I held his hand while we
scanned him
when the scan came up on the computer
screen he had a cyst the size of a golf
ball occupying the space of his left
temporalo it's the first time I've seen
it I've seen it a hundred times since
and when the neurosurgeon drained it his
behavior completely went back to normal
it was that moment the War Began for me
it's like if you don't look you don't
know stop lying about it and I became a
warrior to change psychiatry
but there's a lot of negativity with
being a warrior I was also in the Army I
was an Army psychiatrist
and what I came to realize is a
wonderful psychologist at Virginia
Commonwealth University Worthington who
came up with a method for forgiveness
because when you're holding on to that
toxicity it's sort of like drinking
poison and expecting the other person to
die
and
he did this method and someone murdered
his mother and he said it even worked
for him when he was dealing with the
grief of losing his mother to a horrible
crime
and so I can recall the hate that I've
experienced
so that's the R so we'll call it in
detail
the ears empathize
it's like so what are the haters feeling
you're doing something they don't know
you're doing something that's different
than them you're doing something that
threatens
them
see if I'm right and I'm right
everything in my body knows I'm right
230 000 scans later this isn't fake this
is real and if you don't look you miss
all sorts of important things
but they don't know that
and
if they don't know it and they're
threatened well of course they're angry
I mean I believe I
still hold on to they should at least
come visit right I mean my work is so
public
the a is altruistically give them the
gift of forgiveness
because and I actually don't really pay
attention
to them
because you know I do what I can we
publish studies but
I don't need the negativity so you
altruistically give them the gift of
forgiveness
commit to it and hold on to it
and if you can do that for that
relationship
you have more control over your
happiness
Plus
if you're me you're like I wonder what
their brain is like
and so one of the first things the scans
did for me
is they increased forgiveness
so I asked my dad to get scanned 1991 my
mom came because she's like what can I
do to support you I don't want to do
that my dad 12 years in a row no I don't
want to do that why do you want me to do
that no I don't want to do that and then
he came
and I'd never seen this in a 72 year old
person
his anterior cingulate so we should talk
a little bit about different parts of
the brain how they influence work the
sand here is singulate it's the brain's
gear shifter it allows you to go from
thought to thought move from idea to
idea be flexible go with the flow and
when it's busy and he had the busiest
anterior cingulative any older person
I'd ever seen
worry hold grudges my dad was masterful
at holding grudges
argumentative oppositional I used to
joke that I'm like Dad why is it every
time I ask you for something you say no
he goes I don't do that I'm like no you
do it why he's like I don't know it's
just easier
and Tony Blair the prime minister of the
United Kingdom said the first Hallmark
of a leader is his ability to say no
well my dad was just masterful at it but
I have to tell you seeing that part of
his brain so busy
was helpful for me to forgive him that
it was a brain
misfire rather than it was a soul
misfire
he took a lot of new book about how we
can reverse a lot of these things and we
can change our brain which I guess is
the is the hopeful optimistic side of
all of this so in the case of your
father you see that in his brain is
there something that can be done to
change it absolutely I mean that's sort
of the big exciting message of my life
is you're not stuck with the brain you
have you can make it better and I can
prove it I did the big NFL study when
the NFL was lying that it had a problem
about traumatic brain injury and
football scan 350 NFL players and high
levels of damage stop lying about it but
80 percent of my players get better when
we put them on a rehabilitation program
and there's a story in the book
um about a mixed martial artist who I
was giving a lecture at the clinics and
he raised his hand and he said
I just really love your work but you're
not gonna like what I do I'm like what's
that
he said I'm a mixed martial artist and
I'm like well I can like you but yeah
you're right I'm not a fan of people
bashing your head in and I said let's
look at your scan and it was troubled
um
I said you know I know these supplements
work because they were my NFL formula
but I don't know how fast they work will
you come tomorrow at eight o'clock I'm
going to give you the supplements I give
my NFL players
and then I'm gonna scan you two and a
half hours later
his brain was remarkably better two and
a half hours later now it didn't mean it
would stay that way right he had to stay
on the program and stop doing the things
that hurt his brain
how exciting is that to know even a
couple of hours from now
if I do the right things my brain can be
better
and going back to my dad
what we found is low levels of Serotonin
go with high activity
in the anterior cingulant so if he would
have chosen I could have calmed it down
and helped him be more flexible now he
chose not to do that
but I just remember my grandmother my
mom's mom when she was 92 she went in
the hospital diverticulitis and my mom's
mom had always been
mean she's not kind when she met my wife
for the first time she goes oh you're
Danny's next victim
Grandma I said I'm going to talk bad
about you after you're dead
she had that same brain and when I put
her on medicine to increase serotonin
she became sweet
which just goes
it makes you wonder
how many people end up divorced
because of a brain dysfunction that
could be fixed
um it's just given me great empathy it's
easy easy easy to call someone bad
it's harder to ask why in the case of
your father or your your grandmother is
the brain and the mood kind of disorder
that you've observed in it is that a
consequence of chronic bad habits in
terms of brain health in your view it's
always both
that whenever you give in to saying no
you make saying no more likely right you
develop these ruts in your brain which
is why Behavior change is hard because
you have these ruts in your brain where
it's after dinner I smoke or it's after
dinner I have ice cream or it's the
first thing in the morning I have sugar
cereal and these become like Pathways
they become ruts like deep Pathways in
the brain and and I've had them for
years I mean for a long time before I
got healthy you know I go by Jack In The
Box and get a Diet Coke and get a
chicken fajita pita and it was
habit and so sometimes I'll see a
jack-in-the-box like oh and then of
course my supervisor comes in and like
really and I think of it your supervisor
is in your your brain you're better
better sense well I think of it like
children
um that too many people are run
by the four-year-olds in their head
like I have five grandchildren and Haven
is four and Haven
is funny and smart and sweet but she
doesn't get away she totally can have a
fit
and the rule in my house is if you have
a tantrum to get your way the answer is
no it's always going to be no go for it
and so it didn't have Tantrums with the
kids growing up but too many people the
four-year-old in their head is running
the show it's like no I go buy Jack in
the Box I get curly fries and a coke I
want it I want it I want it I want it
and their parent self
doesn't go doesn't fit your goals you
don't want it right you crave it
and there's a difference between craving
and wanting and it's like inhibit
behavior and that's where we haven't
talked about this yet and I knew I knew
we would on this podcast the CEO in the
brain right so the front third of your
brain is called the prefrontal cortex
it's called the executive part of the
brain and so you talked about some of
your friends who don't make good
decisions who don't wait or delay their
impulses their frontal lobes are
probably sleepy
or smaller
and that'll give them huge problems in
their lives and my work I I've seen
tens of thousands of people have ADD of
one form or another and it often goes
with decreased activity in their frontal
lobes but is that is that nature or
nurture
nature
with input
from nurture
because
they did this great study in Holland
where they took 300 add kids put them on
an Elimination Diet so they basically
eliminated all the crap in their diet
and three months later 72 percent of the
children did not have add anymore so
um but when I diagnose someone with ADD
I generally see it you know coming down
their mom's side or their dad's side it
generally doesn't occur in isolation it
is that strongly heritable
in fact
if I have a kid who's really 80d and I
can't find a mom or dad I'd look at the
kid to see if he looks like his mom or
dad wondering if they got switched at
birth just my experience really and
really no not kidding and
so say that again so if if the child's
brain doesn't resemble the mother of the
father you suspect that so I wonder if
it's if the child's not related had been
switched uh because you're that
confidence because I'm there confident
about the heritability of this now there
are other causes of add like Behavior
like traumatic brain injury the child
fell down a flight of stairs and was
unconscious even for just like 15
minutes that can damage their frontal
lobes If the child was a head banger
that can damage their frontal lobes and
so psychological trauma I sat here with
gabo mate ah interesting we're just
doing a study
on Ace scores do you know about the ace
quiz
stands for adverse childhood experiences
and it was first done in combination
with the CDC and Kaiser they looked at
000 people and they just gave people
this simple questionnaire
um and it's 10 of the most common
childhood traumas So Physical emotional
sexual abuse
having a parent with mental illness with
an addiction incarceration
and you get scored zero
to ten
so I have a one my dad could really be
nasty to me
so there's some of that sort of
psychological abuse but I didn't get
beaten no one sexually molested me and
so on my wife and she wrote a book about
this called the Relentless courage of a
scared child
has eight out of ten my two nieces who
tan and I adopted are both knives and
they found if you have four or more you
have an increased risk of seven of the
top 10 leading causes of death if you
have six or more you die 20 years
earlier now it's not a death sentence if
you know it and you work on it like Tana
has
um you know you have normal lifespan
but how how Wild is that and so when I
learned about I started giving it to all
of our patients and I now have ten
thousand a scores on my patients and we
looked at their brains and what we found
is a tends to activate the medial
frontal lobe and they become
hyper alert
they began to watch what bad thing
is going to happen and I love a therapy
have you ever heard of EMDR yes I've
heard of it it's a psychological
treatment for trauma stands for eye
movement desensitization and reprocess
my favorite Psychotherapy I love doing
it with patients and when I met my wife
she's beautiful she's smart I mean I
like fell for her
and then I'm learning about this so one
of my first gifts to her was 10 sessions
of EMDR which I know is pretty weird
but she went for two years and and I
think it changed the trajectory of her
life because she doesn't live
with the past still present
how did how did it help her and what
what exactly does the therapy involve so
trust a good history and then so for
example if you came to see me
I would have you write down we do a
timeline of your life I just want to
know for each five-year period what were
the great things that happened to you
and what were the horrible things that
happened to you and I do that
purposefully so you'll have a balanced
view if you just talk about the crap in
your life you feel like crap and then
I'd have you write down the top 10
traumas
and then it's it's a structured process
but I'd have you bring up the worst one
we always go for the worst first and
while you bring it up I'll get your eyes
to go back and forth and we'll let your
brain direct where you need to go and so
initially you could feel relive the
trauma but then it tends to dissipate as
opposed to just talking about the trauma
generally you relive it and feel like
crap the bilateral hemisphere
stimulation helps it
sort of
just sucks the life out of it you still
remember it but it's not haunting you
anymore yeah that happened but you're
not sweating or you're not having
nightmares and it just takes therapy too
a whole different level it's sort of
like doing mushrooms without side
effects
if I wanted to you know earlier on you
said you said uh you gave like three
points and the second point was you just
got to know the list so you said if you
want to damage your brain if you want to
hurt your brain you've got to know the
list if you want to help your brain and
have a healthy brain you've got to know
the list going to the the damaging my
brain part if I was intent on damaging
my own brain
what would you advise me to do
so in the book I talk about a mnemonic
called bright Minds you want to keep
your brain healthy or rescue it you have
to prevent or trade the 11 major risk
factors that steal your mind so if you
want to damage your brain bright Minds
the B is for blood flow low blood flow
is the number one brain Imaging
predictor of Alzheimer's disease
okay how do you get low blood flow
caffeine oh [__] nicotine
marijuana alcohol
um having a sedentary lifestyle
being overweight
the r is retirement and aging can we
pause on this uh low blood foot flow
you are the first person I've ever
spoken to who has a comprehensive and
very believable
hypothesis that caffeine has a side
effect I've asked my guests over and
over again because I I think people
refer to caffeine often as like this
miracle drug that comes with no cost
but you're the first one through my
research that seems to be very clear
that caffeine is does have a significant
cost it's a drug
it's it's the most common drug it's
addictive I mean a little bit's fine
but more than a little bit is not fine
it increases cortisol you don't want to
increase cortisol puts fat around your
belly it shrinks your hippocampus but
you know the reason
I started really paying attention to it
is on spacked the study I do which is a
blood flow study it constricts blood
flow 30 percent I have all my patients
hold caffeine the morning of their scans
um because I don't want it to
artificially uh show me they have less
blood flow than they really do
um
it
it fakes you out to think you have
energy what it does is it blocks
adenosine the chemical that tells you to
go to sleep and so often people rely on
caffeine because they're sleep deprived
but it's just this bad cycle and so many
of my patients stop and uniformly they
tell me they feel better they said their
energy is better you talk about one
particular patient in the book who was
struggling with um a variety of
difficulties I think it was like brain
brain fog and memory issues and so on
and one of the things you advised him to
do was to cut coffee
Jeff yeah I remember Jeff he's a pilot
and I live on caffeine and I'm like you
got to get rid of it because brain
looked terrible his brain looked
terrible his brain looked terrible and
he's like no no no
and he's like all right I'm gonna do it
and so he didn't get headaches we cut it
down by five percent a day so three
weeks it was gone he didn't have any
withdrawal didn't have any headaches and
he's like texting me
unbelievable energy
unbelievable clarity
and
it it's a drug and why you know I want
to teach my pill my patients skills I
don't want them to just take pills and
caffeine's a drug
do you drink caffeine a little bit not
much how much was Jeff having
um Jeff was having about 600 milligrams
a day Jesus which is two venti Starbucks
one venti Starbucks is 330 milligrams of
caffeine
and you know we've supersized everything
in this country I don't know if they do
that in the UK but we certainly do it
here and it's it's not a a good strategy
and so long-time restriction of blood
flow to the brain through these things
you've described caffeine marijuana all
of these things has a detrimental impact
on the development of the brain pretty
straightforward I get that so that's the
B
as far as Retirement and aging you want
to prematurely age your brain
drop out of school
do not engage in new learning
I mean you doing this podcast you're
always learning new things which is
great for you
but the lack of when you learn something
new your brain makes a new connection
when you stop learning or you start
doing the same thing over and over again
your brain starts to disconnect itself
being in a job that does not require new
learning is a risk factor for dementia
being lonely
is a risk factor
for dementia so be an ass
and
they're more likely to hurt your brain
at my workplace we have the no [__]
rule so there's a book by a Stanford
Professor called the no [__] rule
love that book and the no [__] rule
is the CEO starts with me so I don't get
to be one but I'm not tolerating anybody
who has [__] Behavior
at work
and
if you're not an [__] you're less
likely to be lonely and loneliness is
terrible for brain function if you want
to prematurely age your brain
eat a lot of red meat
as if your iron and ferritin levels are
high because ferritin
is just stored iron 10 stage the brain
the eye is inflammation if you want to
increase inflammation which is a root
cause of so many medical and mental
health issues never floss
don't really care about your teeth so
you want to love your brain you have to
love your mouth it's absolutely critical
for you not to have gum disease because
if you have gingivitis
off odds are you're at increased risk
for heart disease and depression and
dementia it's fascinating like I didn't
learn about this and I didn't really
care about my teeth and so I started
seeing the lengths between gum disease
and heart disease gum disease and brain
disease and now I'm a flossing fool but
if you want to damage your brain don't
care about your mouth your about your
teeth
don't ever eat fish people who have
grilled or baked fish once a week have
more gray matter in their brain people
have low levels of omega-3 fatty acids
have smaller brains
and if you want to damage your brain eat
the standard American diet
so processed food like eat most of your
calories from the gas station and from
the fast food restaurants near nearby
and they spend billions on getting those
foods to the perfect crunchiness the
perfect meltiness the perfect Aroma
because they hire neuroscientists to
addict your brain
be suspicious
um
the G is genetics you want to damage
your brain blame everything on your
genes like I have obesity and heart
disease my family but I'm not overweight
and I don't have heart disease why I'm
on an obesity heart disease prevention
program every day of my life
because genes load the gun it's what
happens to us and what we choose to do
that pulls the trigger so I adopted my
nieces because their parents couldn't
stop using drugs
and I'm like adamant
if you want my help you have to
cooperate there's no vaping there's no
drug use there's no alcohol
and
it's working
I taught them a new word last week
squameting have you heard of scrometing
I haven't It's a combination of
screaming
and vomiting
and because of the legalization of
marijuana and the increased use
teenagers are getting this and in record
numbers they're in emergency rooms
screaming and vomiting it's called
scrumpeting so
Jane's load the gun but know your risk
and be on that prevention programmer I
mean that's just a sign of intelligent
life the H is head trauma you want to
damage your brain play football play
soccer play rugby
and box
it's and and text while you're walking
in L.A I mean you're just more likely to
have a brain injury
um
because you fall over just because in
case that wasn't clear people are going
to think texting is bad for the brain
the t is toxins
so see alcohol is a health food
it's total crap uh see marijuana is
innocuous it's total crabs I mean I'm
happy they legalized it please don't put
people use marijuana in jail it's a
really bad use of resources really
stupid but let's not say it's good for
us
because teenagers who use have an
increased risk of anxiety depression
suicide and psychosis that's not okay
the brain undergoes wild development and
people sort of don't get this they think
little kids their brain is undergoing
wild development but from the time
you're 15 to 25 it's gone through wild
Construction in fact that's when the
highways are being myelinated have you
ever heard of myelin myelin is a white
fatty substance that gets wrapped on
your neurons and when a neuron or a
brain cell becomes myelated becomes 10
to 100 times faster it's more efficient
and when a baby's born there's very
little myelin in the cortex laid down
when they're about two months old
they're occipital lobes their visual
cortex becomes myelinated and when you
smile at them they smile back because
they can really see you well slowly
myelination goes from the back all the
way to the front but it doesn't get to
the front until you're about 25 so this
masterpiece building if you will is
under construction until you're 25 so
many teenagers it's the crappy food it's
just like throwing poison into the
construction zone
marijuana is innocuous we're going to
the parties and getting drunk
and they're damaging the building
and yes there are ways to repair it
but what idiot would damage the most
beautiful building in the neighborhood
and I often say to my teenage patients I
said hey if you had a million dollar
resource
would you ever feed it junk food would
you ever get it stoned would you ever
get a drunk and the Smart Ones would go
only if you were an idiot but aren't you
worth so much more and we have a high
school course called brain Thrive by 25
we studied it in 16 schools decreases
drug alcohol and tobacco use decreases
depression and improves self-esteem and
one of the weeks is things to avoid
to have a healthy brain and at the end
of the lecture it's a boy never a girl
that's really irritating raises his hand
and goes how can you have any fun
and we play a game with them called who
has more fun the person with the good
brain or the person with the bad brain
who gets the girl and gets to keep her
because he's not an ass the person with
the good brainer the person with the bad
brain who gets into the college they
want to get into who has the best life
and ultimately it's the person with the
good
so we're a t and you want to damage your
brain undergo general anesthesia
for
plastic surgery over and over again
general anesthesia is bad for the brain
um
never read the ingredients
on your personal product labels
because you know there's an epidemic of
low testosterone in young males it's
crazy I was reading the stats the other
day what is it it's because we're
poisoning them is that why that's why
what is the what is the headline start
there regarding testosterone and Men
it's decreasing isn't it year over year
year over year and more than half have
either low normal or low levels I've
never seen anything like it I've been
measuring testosterone levels in my
patients forever
and we're poisoning them there's an app
I like called think dirty it's not what
you think it is it allows you to scan
your personal products and it tells you
on a scale of one to ten how quickly
they're killing you so for example I've
shaved with barbasol
for 50 years and when I learned this a
decade ago
um I like scanned it
one is good tennis kill you early it was
a nine and I was horrified because the
parabens and phthalates are known
hormone disruptors so now I shave with
something called Kiss My Face it's a two
last longer than barbasol
and I do that because I love myself I
mean why would I poison myself unless I
was not that smart and so just start
reading
the labels of your toothpaste of your
deodorant of your shampoo of your body
wash of your makeup and what am I
looking for
because if I read the labels of my
toothpaste
I mean I wouldn't know if it was good or
bad so you can scan scan it with the
yeah or ewg the environmental working
group has an app similar to that you
just educate yourself because it's not
just about you it's about generations of
you because the health of your body
matters when it comes to what babies you
may make
okay
m is mental health
um believe every stupid thing you think
be masterful you want to damage your
brain be masterful at predicting the
worst and then making it worse
um how does that have a bad impact in
the brain negativity increases stress
plus negativity drops activity in your
cerebellum so we talked a little bit
about the CEO the prefrontal cortex well
it's intimately connected to the
processing part of your brain your
cerebellum it's about 10 of the brain's
volume but has half the brain's neurons
and negativity tends to deactivate it so
it actually makes you more confused so
if you think of an athletic slump
they're focused on I'm gonna miss I'm
going to miss and of course they miss
um the second eye is immunity and
infections
um so much to talk about with the
pandemic but people who have low vitamin
D levels are much more likely to die
from covet they're actually much more
likely to die from virtually anything
low vitamin D which occurs in about 60
percent of the population is associated
virtually with every bad thing including
a smaller brain so if you want to have a
smaller brain never go in the Sun never
test your vitamin D level and never take
a supplement brand new study out just
last week people who take a vitamin D
supplement have 40 percent decrease risk
of getting Alzheimer's disease
how simple is that how do they establish
like causation in these studies where
you one would also assume that people
that take Vitamin D supplements have
like you know so this was a prospective
study where they gave half the group
vitamin D and then they followed them
fascinating study
there are tens of thousands of study on
vitamin D and its impact and the darker
your skin the more sun you need so an
interesting study from the Bahamas they
looked at people who were raised in the
Bahamas who then migrated to the United
Kingdom so healthy vitamin D to no
vitamin D because of the weather so from
Botswana and the incidence of psychosis
went up interesting so and how simple is
it it's a blood test get your vitamin D
measured everybody listening to this you
should know it like you know your BMI
like you know your blood pressure
and optimize it either get in the sun
more if you can or take vitamin D3 with
vitamin K2 I mean it's super simple
and I mean it's like
that's easy that's something you can do
right away
um
if I wanted to mess up my immunity
I would encourage myself to have leaky
gut so I'd encourage myself to damage
the lining of my gut with antibiotics
and alcohol and pesticide Laden foods
and I wouldn't need any fiber so I would
really lean into the standard American
diet
going back to your point about
environmental toxins I've always
wondered if it was like pseudoscience
that cosmetic products we have in our
house are having an impact on our
hormone levels you were talking about
hormone levels there my partner has
always said to me things like be careful
with what's in that toothpaste Steve or
she'll look at products that I have and
go nope oh yes I'm like where's the
science we talked about testosterone and
the science is huge there's a wonderful
book so if you ever if you want to get
rid of the doubt
it's called the toxin Solution by Joe
pisorno who started Bastyr universities
one of the most
well-respected naturopaths in the world
now if you want a shortened version read
my book the end of mental illness
because there's a whole section on
toxins with about a hundred scientific
references so you don't want toxins and
and you don't want to think it's
pseudoscience unless you've actually
gone to pubmed.gov
and studied it so many people called my
work pseudoscience and I'm like go to
pubmed.gov today you'll see I've
published 80 studies and oh by the way
they're 15 000 studies on spect so
so I'm a fan of your sweetheart yeah she
she always seems to be right about
everything I seemed I
I'm pessimistic on my way in
and then God this doesn't sound so great
but what she says registers and then I
speak to an expert and they go your
girlfriend is right that is the Story of
My Life
just a little bit and I'll say to it
I'll leave this podcast now and I'll get
she's actually sat over there I'll go
and say oh by the way he uh I spoke to
him and he said the stuff you said about
all the Cosmetic products I used is
right you won't catch you guys it
happens literally every week like three
or four times a week one of the things I
read in terms of
because the impact of Cosmetics on our
hormone levels was that over the last 20
years our testosterone levels have
declined by about 50 on average which is
absolutely terrifying terrifying I have
a lot of friends who are in I have a
staggering amount of friends and people
that I know that are in sexless
relationships and are struggling with
sex and other hormone-related issues
I've got a friend that is um
had a challenge with
it's a POS
PCOS PCOS polycystic ovarian syndrome
and I just
have a suspicion that it's not nature
that's causing some of these issues so
when I hear about how the Cosmetic
products we have in our life are
influencing our hormone levels I go
maybe this is the
maybe this is the guy that's
it's worth making sure someone does an
ultrasound on our ovaries to see if
that's in fact the case
but I have a funny story on PCOS when I
first met my wife
um
she wouldn't attach
um it was more like she was the guy
and we'd make love and I want to cuddle
and she's like okay done
I could I'm like I loved her and she'd
come and she'd go and she's like just
make me crazy and then
um I took her to
our first fight was on the dog we were
gonna get
so I wanted like a King Charles cavalier
I wanted like a lap dog something cute
something I could just have fun with and
she wanted a Mastiff or she wanted she
wanted some killer dog and no it's just
not me and so we got into a fight about
that anyways I
get her to see a hormone specialist
and she diagnoses her with PCOS and it
just made such sense and what she did is
an ultrasound of our ovaries they were
like loaded with these little sis and
she treated the PCOS and so PCOS women's
testosterone levels tend to be higher
and their blood sugar tends to be higher
and they have more problems committing
so she fixes it and then Tana becomes
like committed I love this but then she
calls me at work one day and she said I
found this pocket poodle in Northern
California
that's like two pounds and I'm like who
are you it's like change your hormones
change your dog
do you do you recommend that we check
our hormone levels frequently every year
every year every year DHEA testosterone
thyroid
um estrogen and progesterone for women
every year because
for women
their progesterone drops about 10 years
before they go into menopause
progesterone is the natural
anti-anxiety hormone and when it drops
all of a sudden a woman's 40 and she
can't sleep
and she's more anxious and she's more
irritable and it's causing relationship
problems and she goes to the doctor and
gets a prescription for Ambien for Xanax
and for Lexapro and oh by the way she's
drinking more or using more marijuana
and she doesn't know why
and you just it's easier to replace the
progesterone than to deal with all those
other strategies that help you feel
better now but not later is something
called perimenopause pear
um it's earlier than that yeah
perimenopause is sort of for most women
are in like late 40s
[Music]
um
hormones are so important and if your
hormones aren't right your brain isn't
right one of the things I talk about in
the book is that women have a higher
incidence of Alzheimer's disease now
part because they live longer than men
because they make better decisions
um but
a man's brain is used to not having
estrogen right it's been raised
primarily on testosterone
a woman's brain is used to having
estrogen so when she goes through
menopause and doesn't have estrogen
blood flow in her brain drops and it
puts her at greater risk for
things like dementia and so I'm a big
believer and you know the reason your
hormones drop with age it's the planet's
way of eliminating you
and I'm not okay with that I want to
stick around as long as I can and so
hormone replacement can be super helpful
for people who need it
as you might know the show's now
sponsored by Airbnb absolutely love
Airbnb always have always been a you
know saved my life on so many occasions
and my team when we first got in touch
with Airbnb were talking about how most
people don't realize that their place
where they currently live could become
an Airbnb and I guess the second
question there is how much could your
place be worth and it turns out you
could be sitting on an Airbnb gold mine
without even knowing it some people
Airbnb their entire homes when they're
away that's what I did in New York
whenever I left New York my place was on
Airbnb and people rented it out
sometimes for a day sometimes for two
days sometimes for a week and it's a
great way to cover some of the bills
while you're away so whether you're
looking to go on holiday or you just
want some extra cash for bills or you
want to buy something nice for a
valentine that you love whatever it
might be head over to airbnb.com host
and you can find out how much your
current property where you live can earn
while you're not there I suspect it
might blow your mind because it
certainly blew mine
when I was researching you I I read that
you've dealt with patients who have
chronic difficulty with sleep
several times in your career
um I've got a lot of friends that
I always talk about got a lot of friends
got a lot of friends that have struggled
with sleep
um
often difficult to know what to say to
them to give them advice
what would you recommend in terms of
improving sleep and I was quite curious
because I read about your hypnosis and
hypnotherapy treatment which seemed to
be quite effective in helping people
that were struggling with sleep but what
would you say to someone that struggled
with sleep
it's three things
sleep Envy God care about it avoid
things that hurt your sleep and do
things that promote it so what hurts
sleep and most people know caffeine can
you know if you have it in the morning
it's still in your body at night and so
know how you metabolize it
um if you're having trouble sleeping I'd
kill it and just see if it has a
positive impact
um
a warm room imperiously
a noisy room a room with light they all
impair sleep blue light
so having blue light in your eyes
after dark impairs melatonin production
what about glucose increases in food I'm
sorry if I eat before bed
you become a non-dipper which is so
interesting uh that if you donate three
hours before you go to sleep
right at sleep your blood pressure will
drop as as you go to sleep if you eat
right before bed your blood pressure
won't dip won't drop which puts you at a
higher risk for heart attack and stroke
because it's putting more pressure on
your blood vessels and trust me you
don't want a heart attack and you don't
want a stroke so whatever you can do to
keep your blood pressure healthy and
that's sort of a simple thing people who
eat before bed generally have the habit
of doing it which is why I'm a huge fan
of intermittent fasting because you know
if you have dinner at six you won't eat
again until 10 in the next morning but
what that really means is you won't be
eating right before bed
um so and then things to help sleep
we've talked about what not to do what
to do every night when I go to bed I
think rituals are wonderful so
um I say a prayer
and then I go what went well today and
I've been doing this for a decade
and it's a treasure hunt now I'm like on
a mission to find what I liked about my
day and so I start in the morning when I
woke up and I just go hour by hour
looking
for what I liked about the day and
usually by early afternoon I'm asleep
you know as I'm going through my
timeline
but I'm busy and so often awesome things
will happen and I just sort of gloss
over them so it's a time to consolidate
that's what sleep does consolidates
memories but now I'm focused on positive
things which set my dreams up to be more
positive and people who do that for just
three weeks
increase their level of happiness
how simple is that it's amazing you
wrote a book about the subject of
happiness in 2020
um it's called you happier the seven
Neuroscience secrets of a feeling good
based on your brain type
now the concept of having a brain type I
find really compelling you talk about it
in this book as well the idea that we
have different brain types
um why does it matter to know what brain
type I have
and what are the brain types
there's 16 there's five primary types
right balanced
spontaneous yeah
persistent sensitive and cautious
why do you want to know because they're
going to tell you where you're going to
suffer
and if you know your type and the type
of your power of your partner or the
type of your children you'll actually be
able to work on happiness in the
relationship better and so for example
the balanced person really has a pretty
healthy brain and they tend to be pretty
even and they just basically need they
need basic foundational support we will
know that person I'm sorry I know a lot
of those people that have a seemingly
balanced brain yeah and then they're the
spontaneous people you probably know a
lot of them as well
they are spontaneous they're creative
they're out of the box thinkers
um they also tend to be impulsive easily
distracted disorganized they tend to be
late and they love novelty
and they love surprises entrepreneurs
they're often entrepreneurs
and they often marry the persistent type
which is Type 3 which is Type 3
which they're like a dog with a bone
they stay with stuff they're on time
they hate surprises they like ritual
they like routine it's safe for them
and so throw them a surprise party
and they'll be unhappy that they it
won't be joyful for them it will be
stressful
for them the pandemic was really hard on
the spontaneous people because they're
often extroverts where the persistent
people tend more to be introverts and
they sort of liked not having to deal
with a lot of other unpredictable
people in that way is the phrase that
Opposites Attract quite true because yes
someone that's a bit spontaneous and
maybe an Entertainer an entrepreneur
goes for someone who's a bit more
controlled and rigid and likes a
schedule you see it in relationships you
see one partner that's typically doesn't
care about planning the holiday and the
other person who's done the itinerary
perfectly and they make for a good team
they do initially and then they fight
because the persistent person can hold
grudges the spontaneous person can say
things that hurt their feelings and they
end up seeing me in fact I did a study
called the couples from Hell study where
I scanned 500 couples who failed marital
therapy but still wanted to be together
and eighty percent of them the scan
showed one or both of them needed a
tune-up in their brand in my first case
which I still remembered uh Gary and
Judy
um and a
I initially hated them because I knew I
wasn't going to help them they brought
their kids to me one kid got better the
other one didn't I saw the other kid and
I realized he's not getting better
because Mom and Dad hate each other so
I'm like I want to see you guys in
marital therapy and they said Dr Raymond
we really like you we don't do well in
marital therapy we tried four times and
it always makes us worse and in my head
this was my own
grandiose thinking I'm like well maybe
they just hadn't seen anybody really
good
so I saw them in their first visit they
sat on the opposite end of each couch
it's a bad sign in marital therapy and
after about three months I know I'm not
going to help them she has a PHD in
Grudge holding and he's always late he
says awful impulsive stupid things and
I'm like at the end of six months I
start getting physical stress symptoms
because I hate being ineffective I hate
that and nine months I'm in my shower
getting ready to come to work and I
realize they're on my schedule and my
stomach starts to hurt
today I'm going to tell them to get
divorced because it's not good for
children to be in a home of chronic
conflict but I grew up Roman Catholic
and the idea of divorce especially 30
years ago was awful and the voice the
Catholic voice visited me and said oh
great because you're not a good enough
therapist they're going to get divorced
and go to hell
I looked at the water faucet and went
how much therapy does this take to get
over and I got out of the shower called
my friend who owned the Imaging Center I
said hey Jack will you give me two scans
for the price of one and he's like why I
said Jack I have this couple and they're
not getting better and it's making me
crazy I want to see their brain
and he's like we could start a business
and call it brainmatch.com
anyways they got scanned her frontal
lobes work way too hard just like my dad
he had sleepy frontal lobes and I'm like
how'd you miss it csadd she has OCD
Tendencies I put him on Ritalin I put
her on Prozac I just read an article if
you believe in random chance the night
before
that Prozac comes down the Cingular
gyrus and they were fascinated and
engaged by the brain because they knew
wasn't working
they took the medicine I told them I
didn't want to see him for a month
because I was tired and I wanted them to
have medicine to work when they came
back
they sat on the same couch he had his
hand on her leg that's a good sign in
marital therapy
and 33 years later they're still married
wow
and they don't see therapists
because they learn what they needed to
learn
like responsibility and empathy and
listening and assertiveness and noticing
what you like more than what you don't
like Grace and forgiveness they learned
it and their brains could process it
right go back to Hardware fix the
hardware the software is more likely to
take it I read that you'd you had a
divorce for age 47 and you made a remark
that you wouldn't get married again
unless you got to scan your partner's
brain it's absolutely true there's no
way
I would marry someone unless I saw their
brain is more important than seeing them
naked
and
um I met Tana January 1st 2006 and her
first scan was January 24th
you scan to the same month I scanned I'm
I like it I liked her a lot and she
she's a Neurosurgical ICU nurse so we
sort of bonded over the brain a little
bit but she said it was
one of the best lines that I want to see
your naked brain which I don't think I
actually phrased it like that but that's
the story she tells
it never really a clear correlation
between
when you think if you were to be a
Matchmaker professionally you know if
that was if you pivoted to the
matchmaking industry
what you talked about the five types of
brain what types of brain would you try
and pair together because if type 2 the
spontaneous doesn't work with the
persistent because they end up arguing
is there a pairing sequence that results
in an optimal marriage or relationship
retention so balance brains tend to do
really well they do don't know with
balance brain the guy I was thinking
about spontaneous brains
they need someone that just keeps their
dopamine
flowing because they have lower dopamine
levels so often getting their add
treated that will help get them on a
ketogenic diet which helps steady their
dopamine levels that can be helpful I
think I'm a persistent I'm sorry I think
I'm a spontaneous we'll see
um the persistent types
um tend to struggle because it's the my
way or the highway part
um
the cautious persistent types tend to do
really well because they're anxious
enough that they're thinking about other
people's feelings I think we we missed
so
we got to three didn't we we got to
number three which was the persistent
right number four is sensitive sensitive
which so they're deeply empathic often
um
insightful intuitive and uh can be
empowers uh but they tend to be prone to
depression
and so they have a lot of ants running
around unless they discipline them they
make great therapists
um do they have high levels of stress
no that's the cautious type which is
number four five five yeah they are
loaded with the fortune telling ant they
often will get involved with these
conspiracy theories unfortunately some
of the conspiracy theories tended to be
true that's really hard like you know
I'm a psychiatrist for 40 years and
someone comes in my office and goes the
NSA is listening to my phone and you
know I'm thinking schizophrenia do I
need drugs and it's like no the NSA is
listening to their phone calls
so it's been an interesting time for a
psychiatrist but it's the predicting the
worst and I tell my patients the only
people should really predict the worst
are contract lawyers I mean they should
protect you from what bad things are
going to happen other than that
um you want to predict what's going to
go right
so if I am a spontaneous which of those
five brain types the balance the
spontaneous the persistent the sensitive
the cautious should I marry balanced
okay you want now if you're a CEO
um
you want a persistent you a persistent
cautious type so that's that's type 11.
um to manage you this is a really
important point if you are a business
leader and you tend to be spontaneous
not have a spontaneous assistant because
it'll stress you out and stuff won't get
done and the IRS will come knock on your
door
um
because you're not going to be filling
out the paperwork right
it's really important you need to know
your strengths know your vulnerabilities
and higher
to cover your vulnerabilities too many
spontaneous people hire people they like
that are like them which leads to stress
and chaos
hmm
that's very true
in all of my businesses I've always
found managing directors who are
calmer more organized more risk aware
individuals and it's always worked
really well because I tend to be
very risk
um very prone to taking risks and
my default position which I've had to
learn so I've had to sort of become
self-aware and counteract it is to
pursue multiple things at once
so I have to have this ongoing
conversation with my brain to say Focus
you you your better self your wisdom
knows that focus is your biggest um
Pitfall so well the lack of focus is
your biggest Pitfall and I guess that
kind of brings me to another point which
was this idea you touched an earlier on
about
disassociating from your brain
are you giving your brain a name as you
call it in your book so that you can
have a conversation with it
that sounds like a funny thing to do if
I call my brain I'm going to give my
brain a name my brain is now called
I'm gonna call it Daniel
so there's Stephen who is me and there's
Daniel
who is me
but my Daniel is my brain and I am
Stephen and what is the upside in
creating the separation psychological
distance from the noise
in your head so you don't attach
to it so if it's Daniel
then you can accept
what he says or you can reject it
okay so when I first heard about this
from Stephen Hayes
I'm like what would I give my name and I
named myself after my pet raccoon when I
was 16. and like my mind Hermie was a
shitster she tped my mother's bathroom
she ate all the fish out of my sister's
aquarium she'd leave raccoon poo in my
shoes she's I loved her I loved me but
my mind is a troublemaker It'll like
conjure up all sorts of negative
scenarios so if I separate from it I can
put Hermie metaphorically in her cage
and now what I do because I love her is
I'll put her on her back and I'll tickle
her or I'll cuddle her I'm like it's
gonna be all right
you don't have to believe every stupid
thing you think yes we are gonna die but
we're not gonna die today
and
you know when you can live in the
presence
by managing your thoughts by not
attaching to them by separating from
them that's where peace lives that's
where happiness lives when you can sort
of step outside and just go you know I'm
Not My Thoughts my thoughts might come
from my dad's generation may have been
some of his trauma or it might come from
the voice of my mom and dad
growing up or the voice of the priest or
my siblings or the music I listen to you
know and just because you have a thought
has nothing to do with whether or not
it's true or whether or not it's helpful
the brain is a sneaky organ we all have
weird crazy stupid sexual violent
thoughts that nobody should ever hear I
tell my patients this all the time one
of my patients goes oh I had an indecent
thought about my teenage daughter's
friend I'm a pedophile
and I'm like that's a big leap did you
like climb in bed with her did you make
plans to talk he's no no none of that
I'm like dude you're not a pedophile
it's just your brain plain tricks on you
just because you have that thought well
a whole bunch of people have that
thought but they don't do anything about
the thought
but people don't understand that
thoughts are just creations of neuronal
function and your frontal lobe should
evaluate this is a helpful thought I
should pursue this thought
stay away from this thought
this thought doesn't fit my goals
if I am a spontaneous brain type then is
there anything I can do without drugs to
become a balanced brain type so first
thing one page miracle
write it out it's an exercise in the
book what do you want
just like as a CEO of a company you have
a business plan and you have quarterly
goals write it out what do you want
in your relationships in your work in
your money in your physical emotional
spiritual health why write it down
because you're telling your brain what
you want and then every day you sort of
know what what it is I mean you memorize
that thing and then each decision you
make you ask yourself does it fit does
my behavior
fit the goals I have for my life and so
what you're doing is you're activating
your prefrontal cortex so the part of
your brain that if you really are
spontaneous that's the Sleepy part of
your brain so the first thing is
intention
to have a business plan or have a plan
for your life
the second thing you have to make sleep
a priority because if you tend to be
spontaneous that goes way up when you
haven't slept that also goes way up when
your blood sugar is low so it's not just
high blood sugar is the problem it's
often low blood sugar it's a problem one
of my celebrities who kept getting
arrested in trouble I did a fasting
blood sugar on him was 49. it was way
too low he had hypoglycemia and when I
got him to eat four or five times a day
he never got arrested again so make sure
your diet's right and it's my
spontaneous people tend to do really
well on ketogenic diets or
low simple carbohydrate diets now that
diet will make the persistent type crazy
because that's a focused diet where
if you put someone who can't stop
thinking on a focused diet they think
more on the things that bother them so
the diet really depends on the type
which we talk about
in the book exercise intense aerobic
exercise boost dopamine and there's some
simple supplements like l-tyrosine or I
make something called focus and energy
that's got ashwagandha ginseng rhodiola
and choling things that help you focus
but don't amp you
okay Daniel so we have a new tradition
on this podcast at the end of the Diary
of a CO episodes we ask all of our
guests to write a question and to put it
into the book
the Diary of a CEO so you will be asked
to do the same just before you leave
um but recently what we've done because
we understand that these conversations
Foster a sense of connection in people
because they're a little bit more
vulnerable than your usual conversations
and we believe that that's the door to
connection is we've turned some of the
questions in this book into cards that
people can play at home this is a brand
new thing we've done so on here these
are various cards that have been written
by previous guests on this show if you
scan the QR code on the back it takes
you to
um a video of the person who answered it
to the person that came after them and
then on the front you can see the
question they've asked with their name
on it I'm gonna lay these cards in front
of you I want you to just pick one at
random I've just selected some for you
um out of the full almost I think
there's about 70 or odd questions in
here I've picked 10. so just pick one at
random and I'll ask you to answer the
question that you pick is that okay Joe
you're up for it cool
who's gone for the first one
what is one mistake that you have made
that you have been scared to address
or reconcile
and you want me to answer that question
what is one mistake
that I've made
that I have been scared to address or
reconcile
that I don't like firing people
that it's really hard
and
I came to realize if I don't do it I
should fire myself
but
that's the one thing it's like why did I
hold on to that for so
long
it's it's that when you have the no
[__] rule
firing people's really harder
but yeah I've come to realize
um
that it's an essential skill to prone
because if you're a CEO you're like a
gardener
but it it TAPS in to something about me
being bad
that I don't like
what brain type have you got
I'm a balanced type
and my vulnerabilities because we all
have wings or vulnerabilities persistent
and cautious okay
can I ask you to pick one more card
[Music]
who is the person
you'd most like to say sorry to
but haven't
and I've thought about this my dad died
three years ago
I was so mad at him
and would be pretty vocal about how mad
I was of them
but when you focus that
You Don't See
all the good things that happened I had
said that my a score was one
and my wife's an eight
he provided
a level
of stability
that I didn't appreciate
and so
he knew the last five years that I loved
him and we spent a lot of time together
but I think I would apologize
to him for holding on to the negativity
and that's exactly why we created these
cards if you want to get your own
conversation cards go to the
conversationcards.com that is the
conversationcards.com and I hope
everybody everywhere gets the hands on
them I think the world would be a better
place if we're all a little bit more
vulnerable with each other because that
very much is the daughter connection
okay so the question that's been left
for you in the diary from our previous
guest is
what topic is no one talking about now
that historians will study in the future
well from my perspective it's the
insanity
of the mental health industry that is
destroying
the mental health of America making
diagnoses based on symptom clusters with
no biological data than drugging people
last year there are 337 million
prescriptions for antidepressants
27 of all doctor visits no matter the
specialty 27 someone's leaving with a
prescription for benzodiazepine like
Xanax or Valium this is an insane time
and they call me crazy and I'm not crazy
they're going to be talking about this
dark period in Psychiatry for centuries
to come Jesus
Daniel thank you for me this is very
much the culmination of so much work
you've done over a series of books and
um your life's work so I would recommend
everybody if they have the opportunity
to go and get it to go and get it right
now it is out and it's one of those real
pivotal books that sort of turns the
lights on to something that
to a room that I didn't even know
existed which is my brain
um and the the brain is obviously the
computer it's the driving force as you
said at the start of this conversation
of all the decisions I get right and
wrong and it's my duty to do everything
as that I can to love my brain um and
that's exactly what your book leaves me
with as a parting message is it's this
message of loving my brain and doing
everything I can to treat it as if
um with the respect and love that it
deserves thank you for all of your work
thank you for the inspiration you've
given me and thank you for the the way
that your work has nudged my life and
the trajectory of my life and therefore
as you say the trajectory of those that
come after me's life in a little bit
more positive healthy direction because
that is not nothing that is significant
especially as you zoom out so thank you
so much Daniel it's a joy to speak to
you yeah thank you so much for such a
wonderful interview for being prepared
to help me actually go inside myself and
see how these dots connect and helping
me spread the word
um I'm
trying to create a revolution and
I need people to help so thank you help
me thank you for helping me do this
I've now been a huel drinker for about
four years roughly so much so that I
ended up investing in the company
um and I play a role on the board of the
company but they also very kindly
sponsored this podcast and to be honest
I've never said this before but he all
believed in this podcast before anybody
else the CEO Julian
um told me before we even launched the
podcast how successful it would be and
that heal would back it and I absolutely
have a huge amount of gratitude for them
for that support but an even greater
sense of gratitude for the fact that
they've helped me stay nutritionally
complete throughout the chaos and
hecticness of my tremendously busy
business schedule so if you haven't
tried out here which I hope most of you
have at least given it a go by now try
it out it's an unbelievable way to try
and stay nutritionally on course if you
have a hectic busy schedule and let me
know what you think send me a tweet and
a DM tag me let me know what you think
quick one as you guys know we're lucky
enough to have blue jeans as a sponsor
and supporter of this podcast for anyone
that doesn't know blue jeans is an
online video conferencing tool that
allows you to have slick fast good
quality online meetings without any of
those glitches that you'd normally find
with other meeting online providers you
know the ones I'm talking about and they
have a new feature called Blue Jeans
basic which I wanted to tell you about
blue jeans basic is essentially a free
version of their top quality video
conferencing and that means that you get
immersive video experiences you get that
super high quality super easy and zero
fuss experience and apart from zero time
limits on meetings and calls it also
comes with High Fidelity audio and video
including Dolby voice they also have
expertise grade security so you can
collaborate with confidence it's so
smooth that it's quite literally changed
the game for myself and my team without
compromising quality at all so if you'd
like to check them out search
bluejeans.com and let me know how you
get on DM me tweet me whatever works for
you let me know how you find it
[Music]
oh